================================================================================
1. Introduction
================================================================================

.. figure:: images/1.jpg
    :alt: Figure showing a better user experience thanks to the cloud.

The health emergency has made it even clearer how crucial and strategic
digital infrastructures are for our country, on a par with traditional
infrastructures such as motorways, railways and the electricity grid.
The adoption and diffusion of digital technologies has in fact been
accelerated and facilitated by the pandemic, enabling new ways of
studying and working remotely.

Among the enablers of the country’s digital transformation, a central
role is played by Cloud Computing technologies, which make it possible
to simplify and optimize the management of IT resources and facilitate
the adoption of new digital technologies.

The need for Cloud technologies is set to increase in light of the
exponential growth in the volume of data processed [1]_ and the
pervasiveness of digital services requiring computational
infrastructures that can be quickly and flexibly expanded and scaled,
which is something difficult to achieve using traditional data centres.

The irreversible process of the digital transformation of society has
induced a similar transformation of the Public Administration (PA), both
to ensure greater quality, efficiency and effectiveness of public
services, and to support and create new development opportunities for
the country’s digital economy.

For the PA, the use of Cloud makes it possible to achieve these
objectives with a significant reduction in costs while also helping to
increase energy efficiency and environmental sustainability. At the same
time, the various architectural paradigms and service delivery models
impose the need to adopt an organic national strategy that can guarantee
the necessary strategic autonomy and resilience for the country, as well
as security and national control of citizens’ data and services.

This document aims to set out a strategic plan for the adoption of Cloud
Computing in the PA, in light of the emerging opportunities and risks.

.. [1]
   From 2018 to 2025, the volume of data is estimated to increase by
   around 530% (European Commission, European data strategy. Making the
   EU a role model for an empowered society. Feb. 2020).