================================================================================
Executive summary
================================================================================

The digital transformation of society, accelerated by the still ongoing
pandemic emergency, has made a similar transformation of the Public
Administration inevitable. The digitalization of the Public
Administration is now a priority objective in order to guarantee
citizens and businesses more high-quality, efficient and effective
public services, as well as to create new development opportunities for
the country’s digital economy. In this transformative process, the use
of Cloud Computing, or Cloud, plays a central role due to its enabling
features for simplifying and optimizing the management of IT resources,
reducing costs, and introducing new digital technologies.

For this reason, Italy’s Cloud Strategy was developed with the aim of
providing the strategic direction for the implementation and control of
Cloud solutions in the Public Administration. Migration to the Cloud
allows public administrations to provide digital services and have
secure, efficient, and reliable technological infrastructures, in line
with the principles of privacy protection and the recommendations of
European and national institutions, while maintaining the necessary
guarantees for the country’s strategic autonomy, security and national
control over data.

In this perspective, Italy’s strategy is based on three fundamental
pillars.

1. The creation of the National Strategic Hub (NSH), a national
infrastructure for the provision of Cloud services, whose management and
control are independent from non-EU providers;

2. A qualification process of public Cloud providers and their services
to ensure that their characteristics and service levels are in line with
the necessary requirements of security, reliability and compliance with
relevant regulations and the country’s national interests;

3. The development of a methodology for the classification of data and
services managed by public administrations to allow their migration
towards the most appropriate Cloud solution (NSH or qualified public
Cloud).