Executive summary

The digital transformation of society, accelerated by the still ongoing
pandemic emergency, has made a similar transformation of the Public
Administration inevitable. The digitalization of the Public
Administration is now a priority objective in order to guarantee
citizens and businesses more high-quality, efficient and effective
public services, as well as to create new development opportunities for
the country’s digital economy. In this transformative process, the use
of Cloud Computing, or Cloud, plays a central role due to its enabling
features for simplifying and optimizing the management of IT resources,
reducing costs, and introducing new digital technologies.

For this reason, Italy’s Cloud Strategy was developed with the aim of
providing the strategic direction for the implementation and control of
Cloud solutions in the Public Administration. Migration to the Cloud
allows public administrations to provide digital services and have
secure, efficient, and reliable technological infrastructures, in line
with the principles of privacy protection and the recommendations of
European and national institutions, while maintaining the necessary
guarantees for the country’s strategic autonomy, security and national
control over data.

In this perspective, Italy’s strategy is based on three fundamental
pillars.

1. The creation of the National Strategic Hub (NSH), a national
infrastructure for the provision of Cloud services, whose management and
control are independent from non-EU providers;

2. A qualification process of public Cloud providers and their services
to ensure that their characteristics and service levels are in line with
the necessary requirements of security, reliability and compliance with
relevant regulations and the country’s national interests;

3. The development of a methodology for the classification of data and
services managed by public administrations to allow their migration
towards the most appropriate Cloud solution (NSH or qualified public
Cloud).

1. Introduction

The health emergency has made it even clearer how crucial and strategic
digital infrastructures are for our country, on a par with traditional
infrastructures such as motorways, railways and the electricity grid.
The adoption and diffusion of digital technologies has in fact been
accelerated and facilitated by the pandemic, enabling new ways of
studying and working remotely.

Among the enablers of the country’s digital transformation, a central
role is played by Cloud Computing technologies, which make it possible
to simplify and optimize the management of IT resources and facilitate
the adoption of new digital technologies.

The need for Cloud technologies is set to increase in light of the
exponential growth in the volume of data processed [1]_ and the
pervasiveness of digital services requiring computational
infrastructures that can be quickly and flexibly expanded and scaled,
which is something difficult to achieve using traditional data centres.

The irreversible process of the digital transformation of society has
induced a similar transformation of the Public Administration (PA), both
to ensure greater quality, efficiency and effectiveness of public
services, and to support and create new development opportunities for
the country’s digital economy.

For the PA, the use of Cloud makes it possible to achieve these
objectives with a significant reduction in costs while also helping to
increase energy efficiency and environmental sustainability. At the same
time, the various architectural paradigms and service delivery models
impose the need to adopt an organic national strategy that can guarantee
the necessary strategic autonomy and resilience for the country, as well
as security and national control of citizens’ data and services.

This document aims to set out a strategic plan for the adoption of Cloud
Computing in the PA, in light of the emerging opportunities and risks.

2. Cloud Computing

Cloud Computing is a new paradigm for the use and management of
computing resources and computer services delivered on demand via the
Internet. Cloud services are offered by means of standardized
catalogues. They guarantee services that can be easily and automatically
scaled up depending on load peaks (agility, scalability, elasticity),
and can operate simultaneously and securely on the data and systems of
different users (multi-tenant).

Typically, Cloud services, according to the model of computational
resources offered, are divided into three service models:

1. Infrastructural system services so called
*Infrastructure-as-a-Service (laaS)* for the provision, for example, of
virtualized servers and data storage space;

2. Computational platforms services so called *Platform-as-a-Service
(PaaS)* for the provision of pre-configured and managed environments for
the development of specific applications, e.g. for software development,
data management or containerised applications;

3. Application services so called *Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)* for the
delivery of applications to end users, e.g. e-mail or other remote
collaboration systems.

These different service models allow users of Cloud services to avoid
many of the basic management activities of a data centre’s
infrastructure (such as management of buildings and physical
technological components) and, to simplify the management of initial and
operational configurations of applications and platforms, thus. allowing
considerable economic savings and greater flexibility in managing the
organisations’ demand for new computing resources.

Services are typically provided by *Cloud Service Providers (CSPs)* who
guarantee their operation according to contractually determined levels
(*Service-Level Agreements, SLAs*).

The distribution model of Cloud services can be organised in the
following categories: *Public Cloud, Private Cloud, Hybrid Cloud and
Multi-Cloud*.

2.1 Public Cloud

In the *Public Cloud*, the infrastructure is owned by a CSP which, with
full control, makes its systems available to users, companies and public
bodies in different geographical areas (or regions) of the world,
sharing processing capacity, applications and storage. Such a deployment
allows users of cloud services to benefit from resilient computing
capacities that can be scaled according to actual needs. In the area of
public cloud CSPs, a small group of non-European companies (mainly of US
origin) operate as market leaders. These companies offer Cloud services
with almost unlimited computing capacity through highly sophisticated
technological solutions, so-called ‘hyperscaler’, with high ease of use,
configurability and interoperability.

2.2 Private Cloud

The *Private Cloud* consists of a Cloud environment reserved for an
individual customer for its exclusive use.

This may be on-premise, i.e. based on infrastructures that are entirely
in the domain of the customer, which holds control and full
responsibility for the maintenance and security management of the hosted
data and services, or it may be managed at a third party’s data centre,
where the customer is provided with dedicated resources.

One of the advantages of a Private Cloud is certainly the greater
control that the customer can exert (in terms of choice and contractual
arrangements) over the characteristics of the Cloud infrastructure and
services, especially with regards to security. However, this solution,
particularly in the case of on-premise clouds, presents some
disadvantages as the infrastructure may not be able to guarantee
adequate scalability to handle unforeseen peaks in demand.

2.3 Hybrid Cloud

A combination of the Public and Private Cloud models, the *Hybrid
Cloud*, is a single environment created from several connected
environments in which, depending on need, resources from both a private
and a public Cloud are made available to users. This model extends the
capabilities of a private cloud to use on demand the large-scale
resources available on a Public Cloud, t in order to manage, for
example, sudden peaks in workload; furthermore, it guarantees savings in
terms of the transmission bandwidth needed to exchange data, compared to
what would be possible with a connection to a data centre.

2.4 Multi Cloud

Multi Cloud refers to a model in which several clouds of the same type
(public or private) offered by different providers are used
simultaneously to implement certain services or applications.

Unlike the Hybrid Cloud, which involves the creation of a single
infrastructure that transparently uses different types of Cloud (public
or private), the Multi Cloud model is based on the use of different
public or private Cloud environments that are not interconnected. In a
Hybrid Cloud environment, the distribution of the use of computational
resources between private and public is typically semi-automated and
transparent to the user, whereas a Multi Cloud environment presents
itself as a set of distinct computational resources that can potentially
be integrated at application level.

3. The Opportunities and Challenges of Cloud Computing

The adoption of new digital technologies, and the challenges arising
from it are the subject of important EU regulations such as, among
others, Regulations (EU) 2016/679 and 2018/1807 (known as GDPR and free
flow of non-personal data), Directive 2016/1148 (known as the NIS
Directive), and national security legislation, such as Law 133/2019
(National Security Perimeter for Cyber (Perimetro di Sicurezza Nazionale
Cibernetica, PSNC) [2]_.

3.1 Technological Autonomy

In order to govern and manage the country’s digital transformation
processes, as recognised by the main European institutions, autonomy in
the control of the digital infrastructure of the Cloud and,
consequently, of the storage and processing of data appears to have
enormous strategic importance [3]_.

It is well known, however, that the market shares of European companies’
Cloud infrastructures represent a residual value (less than 10%)
compared to those held by non-EU companies [4]_. However, this
criticality is not only limited to digital services and platforms, but
also, and most importantly, to the infrastructures that enable them to
function.

Given such a contractual weakness of the EU, the massive adoption of
Cloud technology for the provision of PA services is subject to risks
such as in the case of unilateral changes in the terms of services:
increased costs or service interruption, or to actions that are
potentially beyond the control of the country. Achieving technological
autonomy has important implications, not only in terms of the
possibility of exerting direct control over data and services, but also
in terms of promoting an ecosystem of technologies (Cloud Computing,
IoT, Artificial Intelligence, Quantum Computing) which is essential for
the country’s development.

3.2 Control over Data

The operation of cloud services by providers in non-EU countries poses
an additional risk due to the regulations in place in those countries.
As it is well known, non-EU legislation [5]_ may allow - provided
certain circumstances - unilateral requests to the CSP to provide access
to data. These cases involve the possibility for a non-EU country to
access data (or data flows) that are particularly sensitive and
strategic for the EU Member States’ citizens and institutions. In this
perspective, within the framework of the strategy, it is necessary to
clearly determine - via a classification procedure - the types of data
that can be managed by a non-EU provider through a Public Cloud and
which data instead will need to be managed by a Cloud provider that
meets specific security requirements in order to reduce the risk that
the data may be accessible to non-EU governments. The management of such
risks does have, inevitably, not only technological but also
geopolitical implications that should receive adequate consideration.

3.3 Aspects of Resilience

Cloud infrastructures and services supporting PA applications and
national essential entities must adopt appropriate procedural and
technical security measures, as well as redundancy and interoperability
operations. The application of layered security controls (e.g.
pseudonymisation, encryption with on-premise key management) in
compliance with the specific requirements of the data processed, as well
as service continuity and disaster recovery measures available
throughout the entire national territory, will increase the level of
resilience against incidents such as cyber attacks and breakdowns.

In particular, although international practices and technical standards
are widely applied by Cloud service providers, given the criticality of
the data and services involved, the Cloud migration strategy requires a
certification process of public Cloud providers and their services. The
qualification must assess not only the security dimension but also the
architectural and organisational aspects which may have negative impacts
on the resilience, e.g. vendor lock-in situations. Another important
direction, in line with the recent initiatives and directives of the
European Digital Agenda [6]_, is the standardisation, harmonisation and
interoperability of Cloud services. Within this context, and with the
aim of developing common requirements for a European data
infrastructure, the GAIA-X project [7]_ was launched; since the
project’s inception Italy had an active involvement in its development.
The project, designed for European based companies, has the objective to
build an open and resilient digital ecosystem through the federation of
cloud services. This ecosystem is built on common standards, ensures
transparency and interoperability, capable of connecting centralised and
decentralised infrastructures, and transforming them into a homogeneous
system.

4. Cloud Strategy for the Public Administration

Currently, most public services are delivered through PA data centres
that often lack sufficient capabilities to ensure adequate standards of
reliability and resilience. Achieving and maintaining such standards
requires investments and skills that are not currently available in many
central and local public administrations. In this context, the Italian
Cloud Strategy is intended as an implementation methodology of the
“\ *Cloud-First*\ ” policy, a key pillar of the digitalization process
of the PA as identified in the Italian PNRR. This will *guide and
encourage the safe, controlled and complete adoption of Cloud
technologies for the PA*, with the aim, in the long run, that all the
services provided are based on “Cloud-native” applications, i.e.
natively developed on the basis of Cloud paradigms.

The Cloud Strategy for the PA is therefore based on the following
strategic guidelines:

1. **Classification of Data and Services:** definition of a data
classification process to guide and support the migration of PA data and
services to the Cloud;

2. **Qualification of Cloud Services:** implementation of a systematic
process of scrutiny and qualification of Cloud services usable by PA;

3. **National Strategic Hub:** creation of a national infrastructure for
the provision of Cloud services, whose management and control are
autonomous from non-EU actors.

The implementation of these macro-actions will make it possible to
harmonise and regulate the adoption of the Cloud in the PA, as well as
to apply economies of scale to encourage a reduction in management costs
by offering more reliable and resilient digital services.

4.1 Classification of Data and Services

In light of the technological and regulatory challenges concerning the
broad spectrum of available Cloud services, Cloud adoption must be
adequately regulated so as to mitigate the systemic risks involved. The
key element for such regulation is to identify a *systematic process of
classification of data and services* managed by PAs, the result of which
can be used to standardise and steer the process of migration to the PA
Cloud. To this end, the classes of data and services are identified on
the basis of the damage that their compromise, in terms of
*confidentiality*, *integrity* and *availability*, would cause to the
country system. These classes are:

• **Strategic**: data and services which, if compromised, may have an
impact on national security;

• **Critical**: data and services the impairment of which could be
detrimental to the maintenance of functions that are important to
society, health, safety and the economic and social well-being of the
country;

• **Ordinary**: data and services the impairment of which does not cause
the interruption of state services nor, in any case, damage the economic
and social well-being of the country.

This classification leaves aside specific regulations and security
requirements; it only focuses on the possible impact on the country. The
application of the classification process, which is outlined below, will
allow an informed analysis of the impacts and the applicable class, as
well as the identification of the appropriate security and regulatory
requirements. For example, data and services related to essential state
functions and services, i.e. identified within the scope of the
Perimetro Sicurezza Nazionale Cibernetica (PSNC), will be classified as
*Strategic*, citizen health data will be classified as *Critical*, while
data and services related to institutional web portals will be
classified as *Ordinary*.

4.2 Qualification of Cloud Services

Public administrations acquire Cloud services through procurement
procedures which are not flexible enough to keep up with the market
development and, most of all, do not allow the appropriate evaluation of
the technical and organisational risks involved in adopting a specific
service.

In the context of facilitating and guiding the implementation of the
“\ *Cloud-First*\ ” policy for the PA, it is crucial to provide an
*ex-ante qualification schema for Cloud services* that can be purchased
by the PA. This qualification, starting from the experience gained by
AgID, aims at simplifying and regulating the adoption of Cloud services
both from a technical and an administrative point of view. In light of
the presented challenges and the spectrum of cloud services considered,
the qualification of Cloud services should include the analysis of the
following aspects:

1. *Operational management* of Cloud services, with details of the
technical and organisational standards [8]_, and data control measures
applied;

2. *Security requirements* applied in data management and service
delivery, such as encryption keys management policies and security
controls;

3. *Service conditions* applied to service delivery and reporting, such
as availability guarantees and contractual instruments available to
administrations.

On the basis of the analysis of the technological and organisational
solutions available on the market, the three aspects of the analysis
make it possible to identify ex ante the following qualification of
Cloud services.

The spectrum of Cloud services varies from:

*Public Not Qualified (extra-EU / EU)*, for which control tools on data
and services are essentially non-existent;

*Qualified Public Cloud (EU)* services ensuring compliance with relevant
legislation (e.g. GDPR and NIS), with technical and organisational
security requirements typically through the use of granular encryption
systems managed by the CSP provider [9]_, and allow greater control over
the data and services managed;

The use of solutions based on Public Clouds with on-premise control of
security mechanisms, i.e. *Encrypted Public Cloud (IT)*, significantly
increases the available level of control over data and services,
introducing greater autonomy from non-EU CSPs in the operational
management and control of technology infrastructures [10]_;

Private and Hybrid Cloud solutions allow additional isolation from the
public regions of the main CSPs, ensured through operational management
performed by a designated provider under the surveillance and monitoring
of the national authorities. These implementations can be divided in two
groups: those based on hyperscaler technology licensed from one or more
CSPs, i.e. *Licensed Private/Hybrid Cloud (IT)*, and those implemented
using commercial technologies that are qualified by means of
technological scrutiny and certification procedures, i.e. *Qualified
Private Cloud (IT)*.

The qualified Cloud services shall be used, according to the data
classification outcome, enforcing the following constraints:

• The Qualified and Encrypted Public Cloud offerings shall host
*ordinary* data and services;

• The Encrypted Public Cloud, the Licensed Private/Hybrid Cloud shall
host *critical* data and services;

• The Licensed Private/Hybrid and Qualified Private Cloud shall host
*strategic* data and services.

The process of qualification of Cloud services, in order to simplify the
adoption of Cloud services in the PA should end with the creation of an
*electronic marketplace of qualified Cloud services*\  [11]_. This
marketplace should be the means by which administrations are guided, in
accordance with the data and services classification process, in the
choice of the Cloud services that are most suitable for them and can be
purchased through simplified and pre-negotiated administrative tools.

4.3 The National Strategic Hub

The rationalisation and enhancement of security and reliability of the
PA’s multiple data centres involves the development of a new IT
infrastructure that is able to serve the multiple PAs located throughout
the country: *the National Strategic Hub (NSH, known in Italian as “Polo
Strategico Nazionale” - PSN)*\  [12]_.

The NSH aims to equip the PA with Cloud technologies and infrastructures
that can benefit from the highest guarantees of reliability, resilience
and independence. To this end, the NSH will be geographically
distributed throughout the country and located at the most suitable
sites [13]_, in order to ensure adequate levels of business continuity
and fault tolerance. The operational management of the NSH will be
entrusted to qualified national providers on the basis of appropriate
technical and organisational requirements. The providers will have to
ensure control over the data in accordance with the relevant
legislation, and it should help the PA to negotiate appropriate
contractual conditions with Cloud Service Providers.

The NSH should allow the PA to guarantee, by design, compliance with
security requirements, e.g. PSNC and NIS, and should enable the
migration - which may in a first phase be performed via a
*lift-and-shift* process - to IaaS and PaaS Cloud service models.

According to the classification provided in the previous section, the
NSH will offer the *Encrypted Public Cloud (IT)* services, i.e. it will
support for instance, on-premise encryption tools integrated on a Public
Cloud for the PA, and the spectrum of private Cloud services, i.e. the
*Licensed Private/Hybrid Cloud (IT)* and the *Qualified Private Cloud
(IT)*.

In accordance with the classification and qualification procedures, the
aim of the NSH is to support central administrations and the main local
administrations, e.g. regional PA, local health authorities and
metropolitan cities.

5. Public Administration’s Migration to the Cloud

The migration to Cloud services or the NSH will be governed through a
centralised, smooth and uniform process for all administrations.

Migration plans will then be defined according to the result of the
classification of data and services. The classification and the
migration plans will be defined on the basis of appropriately defined
questionnaires, and will be supported, for their respective profiles, by
the National Cybersecurity Agency (ACN) and the Department for Digital
Transformation (DTD).

This process cannot be separated from the public sector’s
accountability; it will start with identifying and cataloguing the data
and services managed by each PA; consequently it will apply a
categorisation on the basis of the impact of potential data breach,
regulatory constraints and security. The migration plan will be
validated and confirmed by the Department and the Agency in order to
ensure enforcement of the national Cloud strategy.

6. Adopting the Cloud Strategy

The Italian Cloud Strategy will be divided into subsequent phases
according to the timeline proposed below:

**PHASE 1** - *Publication of the call for tenders for the
implementation of the NSH*: By the end of 2021 at the latest, the call
for tenders for the implementation of the NSH will be published.

**PHASE 2** - *Procurement contract awarding and implementation of the
NSH*: The awarding of the tender should take place by the end of 2022 at
the latest.

**PHASE 3** - *Migration of administrations*: Starting from the end of
2022 at the latest, the migration of PAs to the NSH should begin and be
completed by the end of 2025. During the migration phase, priority will
be given to those Central Public Administrations that currently operate
with their own data centres, classified as Category B, by AgID’s census
of PA ICT assets (e.g. data centers with structural and/or
organisational deficiencies or that do not guarantee service
continuity).

.. [1]
   From 2018 to 2025, the volume of data is estimated to increase by
   around 530% (European Commission, European data strategy. Making the
   EU a role model for an empowered society. Feb. 2020).

.. [2]
   Conversion into law, with amendments, of Leg. Decree 21 September
   2019, no. 105, on urgent provisions concerning the National Cyber
   Security Perimeter.

.. [3]
   OECD (2019) Regulation and IRC: challenges posed by the digital
   transformation. 20th meeting of the Regulatory Policy Committee,
   17-18 April 2018, OECD Conference Centre, Paris, France.

.. [4]
   See, for example,
   https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2019-07-29-gartner-says-
   worldwide-
   iaas-public-cloud-services-market-grew-31point3-percent-in-2018 and
   https://www.idc.com/getdoc. jsp?containerId=prUS45552219 and
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveandriole/2019/11/20/forrester-research-gets-
   cloud--computing-trends-right/#5b30ee4468a2.

.. [5]
   Examples are the National Intelligence Law of the People’s Republic
   of China, the Clarifying Lawful Overseas Use of Data Act (CLOUD Act)
   or the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance (FISA).

.. [6]
   https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/europe-fit-digital-age_en

.. [7]
   https://www.data-infrastructure.eu/

.. [8]
   For example, the international standards ISO 27017/27018, ISO 22301
   and CSA STAR.

.. [9]
   These services include, for example, the use of key management
   systems (KMS), based on special hardware modules (i.e. HSM).

.. [10]
   For example, by using an on-premise HSM to manage the keys used to
   encrypt data on the Public Cloud.

.. [11]
   This proposal is similar to what has already been successfully
   implemented in other countries, e.g. the UK Digital Marketplace
   https://www.digitalmarketplace.service.gov.uk

.. [12]
   As provided for in Article 33-septies, paragraph 4, of the Decree-Law
   of 18 October 2012, no. 179, converted, with amendments, by Law No.
   179 of 17 December 2012. 221.

.. [13]
   Examples include the physical security levels of data centers,
   mitigation of natural disaster risk and integration with multiple
   connectivity sources.
